[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to a very special
episode of the All Thoughts podcast. I'm
Tracy Aloway and I'm Joe Weisenthal. So
what you are about to hear has the very
very modest title of the best ever panel
on the world's most important market.
That is the US Treasury market. Of
course, this was recorded live at our
New York event on June 26. That's right.
We had our recent OLATs live event in
New York. And there's so much going on
in the Treasury markets. There's
questions about rates. There's questions
about foreign demand. There's questions
about liquidity and the capacity of
existing Treasury market infrastructure
to handle all of the volume of debt out
there. So, we wanted together some of
our favorite people to actually
understand what's going on. Yep. Who's
going to buy all the bonds? And we did
indeed have an absolutely amazing panel.
So, we had Nelly Lang. She is a senior
fellow over at the Brookings
Institution. She is also the former
under secretary of the Treasury for
Domestic Finance. We had Ira Jersey, who
you might remember from a previous
episode. He is the chief US interest
rate strategist over at Bloomberg
Intelligence. And finally, we had an
OddLot's favorite, Josh Younger. He is a
lecturer at Columbia University, among
many other things. So, we hope you
enjoy. Take a listen. So, uh, is anyone
worried about who's going to buy the
debt?
Who goes first for that one? Well,
anyone? I I mean, I guess I'll start. Um
I I'm not worried about who's going to
buy the debt. Um you know when when we
think about markets generally and
especially markets for sovereign debt of
large countries that are relatively
liquid, there will be a buyer. Now the
price might change and I think that's
one of the things we have seen somewhat
um in recent weeks when you have
somewhat of a slowing economy in the US.
You certainly see like two-year yields
have actually gone down, you know,
better part of 50 basis points over the
near term, but the long end hasn't done
very much at all. And I think that that
is at least in part an indication that
there are some people who are a little
bit scared to buy that debt without
having some type of premium put onto it.
So it it'll get bought. The question is
at what price? And and that's different,
right? Like I'm an investment
strategist. I'm not a policy maker,
right? Right. And and I think that
there's some people who kind of messed
that up with what like our job is. When
Nelly was at the Treasury Department,
she had a much different, you know, view
of the world that she had to do as
opposed to what we do as investors.
Well, I mean, on that note, it is true
that we have more, I would say, price
sensitive buyers in the market than we
used to, right? So, we used to have a
lot of central banks, a lot of sovereign
wealth funds. they're still there, but
compared to domestic buyers, um, retail,
like that has grown a lot more. Nelly,
does that change the way you think about
debt versus, you know, some years ago?
Absolutely. So, you said prices will
adjust. There will be a buyer, but it
used to be decades ago, we just had a
much more stable investor base, central
banks, foreign funds. Um, now it's like
the non-bank, what we would call the
non-bank financial institutions. It's
hedge funds for various reasons, private
funds who use treasuries for liquidity
risk management. So the minute things
get volatile, they'll want to sell
treasuries to help manage their own
positions. And so the investor base has
changed. There will there will be buyers
but it could change the price and change
the way prices fluctuate. You know there
just going to be much more volatility
given the changing investor base. And
that's something that Treasury who has
to issue the debt regularly. We can we
we when I was at Treasury probably 250
auctions a year. they think about that
and uh it does affect how you think
about bills versus longer term coupons
and all that. I guess I would different
way of saying the same thing. U I should
start with I I I thought I'd get away
from disclaimers when I left the feds
but I have to say a disclaimer which is
this is not investment advice and I
worked at a place that has lots of
positions and nothing I say should
implicate what which positions we may
have or not have. That said, uh I uh you
know, I think it's uh a similar way to
ask the question is why are they buying
the debt? Because the market's going to
clear at a price. Uh we may or may not
like that price, but prices used to
fluctuate like all over time for various
reasons. I mean during the civil war, we
had a captive demand base because if you
wanted to be a bank, you had to buy
treasuries. And yet the price moved,
right? And so for me it's are you buying
a security to hedge a liability that is
of similar duration to the thing you're
buying. Are you in it for the long haul?
And uh a classic example is like a life
insurance company which has very
long-term longevity indexed is the term
of art. Right? It's like as long as you
people are alive there's going to be
life insurance companies that have to
buy debt of similar length and they're
going to be very stable. They might be
price sensitive but probably less so.
And at the end of the day, they have
this liability that has to get funded.
Banks to the same extent have these very
long-term liabilities. Deposits are
long-term liabilities. I think we talked
about that on one of the episodes. So,
they need long-term assets to hedge
long-term liabilities because, you know,
you all have bank accounts. You can get
your money back whenever you want, but
you tend not to, right? So, that's a
long-term liability. A hedge fund is not
in it for 10 years because that is not
the nature of the of the business. Um,
they are responding to price signals and
relative value. Treasury trading is
really just a response to price signals
where the market is attempting to find
the lowest cost buyer. There's this
great book from the 19th century which
is inspiration for Freriedman. I'm not a
Freeman knight but like it's an
interesting story which is called
feeding Paris which is by Bastiat and a
French economist and he was saying if
one person was responsible for feeding
Paris, everyone would die because it's
impossible to feed a million people if
you're making all these decisions on
your own. So price signals get the food
to where it has to go when it has to go
there. And so like the miracle of of of
the price mechanism is the fact that
Paris wakes up every morning um and has
food and and it's still true, right? I
mean cities are complicated. And so the
the in the Treasury market case, the the
feeding Paris equivalent is basis trades
and swap spread trades and every every
instance of buying a security with
levered money repo and things like that
and hedging the risk with the derivative
where the price difference between those
things makes that worthwhile. And that's
also a signal that we don't have enough
of those liability hedgers who are in it
for the long haul. We have to find
somebody else. What are the data points
we should be looking at? Because if I
look at the 10-year yield, you know,
it's something to do with the long-term
trajectory of monetary policy and that's
going to fluctuate for various reasons,
inflation growth, etc. If we want to
capture some of these other dynamics
such as the change in who are the buyers
or the just the desire to even own US
dollar denominated debt assets, what
should what else should we be looking
at? Well, so so the way that I look at
US treasuries, assuming that there's not
real credit risk, right? And I would I
would still I would still argue that
there's still not credit risk more than
a couple of basis points that's embedded
in the the current yield of say the
10-year Treasury. Then 10-year
treasuries the again the way that I look
at it it have to be somewhere around
nominal GDP growth right so basically at
the trajectory of what is the growth
rate of the country in the longer run
and that's what the market is going to
spit out plus or minus like you said
some kind of liquidity or either premium
or discount. Now, I would argue that
with treasuries, to Josh's point right
there, is that markets that have deep
liquid funding markets, deep liquid
derivatives markets, in order for
someone to hedge that risk, you tend to
get better outcomes and lower yields
because of that. So, you know, we did a
study. I actually um when I was back at
Credit Swiss, I did something actually
for the for a World Bank study about
what is liquidity in just about every
single OECD government bond market in
the in the world. And what you
determined is bid offers were tightest
when you had deep and liquid funding
markets like repo and when you had
derivative markets. So you you look at
Italy that basically didn't have a
derivative market that was particularly
deep and liquid versus a France which
did and a Spain that did actually. So so
Spanish spreads were actually tighter
than Italian spreads. Um, not that the
yield levels might have been the same,
but but the the difference is those deep
liquid like ancillary markets around
things matter. And that's where the US
is unlike any other country in the world
because we have all of those things in
abundance that very few other markets
have, you know, and and I think that's
one reason why it's going to be
difficult for people not to be involved
with treasuries either as a liability
management tool or as a trading in
instrument.
Uh, well, oh, Nelly, please. I was just
going to add I think just to emphasize
you know it is long-term how to think
about yields long-term nominal GDP
growth but there's a lot of uncertainty
about that growth and that comes and you
know that fluctuates and so if you're
uncertain about inflation even if you
have an expected path of inflation if
it's high it might be more volatile or
if you're uncertain about policies any
kind of policy either you know whether
you're going to support the dollar or
you're going to support the US as a safe
haven or you're going to support debt or
try to reduce debt that adds
uncertainty. So then treasuries you know
like in long long run it is nominal GDP
but in the meantime you're kind of going
to fluctuate what these we call premiums
or discounts you know depending on how
much uncertainty there is about that I
tend to think there's a fair amount of
uncertainty about that right now. Can
you convince Joe that there is such a
thing as the term premium?
Well, yes because so because if you
define term premium as the expectations
hypothesis
less whatever the current yield is
there's a residual and that is a term
premium. Then you just try to define you
try to use things you know about to
explain the residual but there's always
something left and that to me is a term
premium empirically. I empirically I
don't know if I'm going to convince you,
but I think I called it on uh Bloomberg
radio actually. I called it the uh the
dark matter of um of the Treasury
market, right? That term premium must
exist. The question is, do we measure it
properly, right? That and and that's the
art of it as opposed to the science of
of term premium. So, I like the easiest
possible way to do this, which is just
to ask people what they think short
rates are going to be over the long run.
Yeah. And what long-term rates are going
to be tomorrow. And the Philly Fed does
this every quarter. And there is a term
the Philly Fed. Okay, same more. So they
just ask economists to make predictions
as to what they think this that or the
other thing are going to do. And there's
like inflation and GDP growth and all
these other things. But once a year, I
think the first quarter, so we probably
get that either now or soon. They ask
10ear average T bill yields and then
they also ask about the tenure yield.
And so you're just literally asking
people there's a lot of bells and
whistles you can put on these models.
And some of the models with bells and
whistles incorporate the survey data.
Some people just look only at the survey
data. Some people do just the modeling,
but in all these cases, there's a
residual. Um, doesn't mean it's positive
is the really key thing. Turner term
premium can be negative, which you can
see why I'm unsatisfied. Yeah. Like this
is the thing. It's dark matter. They ask
these surveys. Yeah. Which doesn't
really like they ask this they ask a
random survey. Sometimes it gets
negative. Like you can see why like I'm
skeptical. Like I'm not totally
satisfied by any of this. No, but
there's a difference between the
two-year yield and the 10-year yield. So
therefore that difference also true. No,
that could be the expectations of of
race between two and 10. But you can
write down what you think or a survey of
what you think is between the two and 10
and there's usually a residual and can
be positive or negative and having it
can often be explained correlated with
things like inflation expectations or
other kinds of uncertainty. I can tell
you from experience with both dark
matter and turn premium. Oh yeah, Josh
was an actual astrophysicist. So both
deeply unsatisfying. Um so wait, what's
dark matter in the uh from the physics
perspective? Well, we don't know what it
is. We just know it's there. Uh there
were attempts to explain it away in
various like trying to hang on to the
old way we think about the world is full
of stuff that we can touch and see.
Yeah. But those never worked and there's
just too much of it. Um and then don't
get me started on dark energy which is
the opposite, right? And so I I I worked
for uh for someone at Hopkins years ago
who for his his PhD thesis he was told
to confirm other experiments to measure
the size and shape of the universe. And
part of that was weighing it. And so he
did that experiment using supernoving
which is a different way to do this.
Lots of different ways to do things. Got
a negative number. Super unsatisfying.
Negative mass density of the universe
which you immediately you'd say like
okay well this was a waste. Why did I
spend two years doing this? instead he
ran with it and it turned out it was
super real and he got a Nobel Prize from
that outcome which I'm not saying will
come from term premium modless but but
sometimes the deeply unsatisfying thing
is the more you dig into it the more
it's real and I think that any way you
slice that information either literally
asking people or trying to model what
the market's telling you in some super
sophisticated way you always come up
with a residual now the question is what
is that term premium telling you and can
you find consistent ways to measure it
and track it and there's positive
negative thing is clearly the case and
you know there's different microeconomic
ways to explain why that should or
should not be true. It really comes down
to uncertainty. So and is the
uncertainty correlated with yields. So
if I don't know what's going to happen
in the future to the economy, is that
uncertainty greater or lesser when the
rates go up or down? And that naturally
generates these dislocations.
[Music]
Can you talk about the existence of
something else which is bond vigilantes?
So, we just we just heard Taleb talk
about the deficit. And yet, I feel like
the notion that there are investors
that, you know, wake up one morning and
say, "Oh, wait. I'm really worried about
the deficit. Today's the day I'm going
to, you know, sell all my bond
exposure." That probably doesn't happen
that often. And then secondly, Nelly, I
would be very interested in your take on
this, but you know, when you were at
Treasury, did you sit in the office
going like, "Oh, the bond vigilantes are
going to get me. I better be disciplined
with my issuance schedule.
Um, was that a question for me or for
everyone? Everyone. Okay. Well, let me
just No, I didn't sit there with with
that. And I was at the Fed for 30 years
before I went to Treasury. And you do
care a lot about bond yields. I mean,
it's sort of fundamental to the way
monetary policy works. It's fundamental
to the way you issue treasuries, but you
don't think about it on a daily basis.
But it really influences how you view
events like these scarce events and if
um these like you know shocks that you
weren't which by definition you're not
expecting but if you've got a system
where there's a lot of leverage and you
have an unexpected shock people are
going to make trades and change
positions and that's when you worry but
it's not an ongoing thing. So those
kinds of to sort of prevent that you
spend a lot of time as a policy maker
where do we understand where the
leverage is and how can we keep it
manageable and make sure they can keep
their funding. This is gets to the point
the funding being you know fundamental
to being able to trade treasuries. So
it's kind of a bigger picture but it's
not a daily thing. I don't but um but
it's important. I actually think it's a
really important market disciplining
mechanism. Yeah. The level of debt
matters, right? So the the bod
finchelantes, like there's no group of
people who get together at a bar and
say, hey, we're going to go sell
treasuries. Today's the day. Yeah.
Exactly. Like like, hey, tomorrow, you
know, the debt is going to be too big.
Let's just sell treasuries. The the
issue, I think, is manifests itself in
multiple ways. And one is this the
steepening of the yield curve that we've
seen, right? in a in a normal
environment. You'd expect that anyway if
the Federal Reserve was expected to cut
rates, which it certainly has. But at
the same time, you know, you do have a
growing fear that when you have two
trillion, $2.5 trillion deficits every
year and we wind up in a in a in a debt
trap where interest rates and the
interest on the debt ends up being so
large that the fiscal agents in
Washington will have to do something
about it. but the market hasn't yet
forced them into it. And and I think
that that's that forcing um that forcing
the government to actually act and do
something is really what might have to
be the impetus for you to actually get
some kind of fiscal response. The
challenge is political, right? And and
that is because 50 plus% of our debt is
interest of excuse me of our spending by
the federal government is Medicare,
Social Security, and interest on the
debt. Well, those are hard things to
contend with, right? It's really, really
difficult. So, I I I believe in bond
vigilantes, is not in a US context. And
what I mean by that is when we talk
about bond vigilantes, we're really
referring to the '9s em crisis where the
concern was I'm not going to get my
dollar. They were dollar bonds. I'm not
going to get these dollars back because
the counterparty to this debt doesn't
have them and can't get them at a
reasonable price. And so, the bond will
default and therefore I want to get
ahead of this default because, you know,
the classic bank run. and I want to get
out before everyone else is before I'm
stuck. In the US context, you don't have
that problem. So, the question is who's
going to wake up and sell and why? I'm
saying why again. Um and and they will
sell because they are forced to sell.
And we've had the repo vigilantes, so to
speak, strike in 2020 and in 2025. And
they were forced to sell for a variety
of reasons. One was just the increase in
the volatility of the market in general.
Um and then there were margin calls
especially in 2020 where they were
delevered. Um and the uh the the the
question then becomes like are we
heading for that kind of scenario? And
the reason why the debt growth matters
is because these repo vigilantes are not
worried about the credit of the bonds
they hold. They're worried no one will
buy them from them because the banking
system or the dealer, the bank
affiliated dealers that are be supposed
to be on the other side of these trades
won't have capacity and every trade's
going to keep ticking cheaper and
cheaper and cheaper and they're going to
be in a difficult like sort of
marktomarket situation. But that's a
very different set of considerations.
Yeah. And it's sort of related to
overall growth in the debt, but it's
also related to the structure of the
market and how it places it. Since we're
here and we're just clarifying things
for me that I've always wanted to, you
know, learn about for years, over 10
years, I've been sitting at my Bloomberg
terminal. Every once in a while you get
a red headline and it talks about like
bid to cover in the tail and I can never
tell if any of these auction statistics
really make a difference. Like, oh,
terrible auction and then it was a good
auction.
What how should I consume that
information? How useful is that? Or for
whom is that useful? So, so, so we
actually started just earlier this year
in Bloomberg Intelligence having a
grading methodology where we actually
grade these from D to A plus and you
know we we we look at a variety of the
bidding metrics in order to do that and
and how they compare to recent history.
So, one of the big things that you've
seen and this goes to Josh's thing uh
issues about structure. you go back
about 10 12 years and you saw that
primary dealers were the biggest buyers
of coupon uh coupon debt. Today they're
the smallest. So you actually in the
recent auctions for example that we just
had this this week uh we did a
seven-year auction earlier today we had
five year yesterday. Um the uh dealers
only bought about 10% of the bonds
whereas if you went back to 2012 2013 it
would have been they would have bought
40 to 60% of those auctions. So the
bidding metrics matter and it matters
because you can see where the primary
demand is coming from. And we know now
that you know dealers because of the
changes in market structure that have
occurred particularly since the
institution of Basil 3 are are much
smaller buyers and and you know
basically end users are much larger
buyers and and some of those are high
frequency traders or maybe people who
have repo books and kind of need to fill
them by by getting some collateral. So
all of those bidding metrics matter, but
the tails will show you that the market
was mispriced at the time that the
auction closed versus what the aggregate
demand was at that auction. And that's
that tail is the single most important
thing to look at followed by then some
of the details in there about who was
actually purchasing and then u you know
how much they bid for. So, since we
brought up market structure, it is true
that the Treasury market has experienced
a number of volatility events at this
point, which is weird because in theory,
it's supposed to be a pretty boring kind
of stayed old-fashioned market and it's
been anything but. You're telling me
that I'm I've been boring. I'm so sorry.
I'm so sorry. Well, not anymore. That's
the good news. It's supposed to be
supposed to be. Um, and we have all
these things that have been put in place
after every single volatility event
like, you know, the RRP, the standing
repo facility. We just had a change to
the supplementary leverage ratio to help
dealer banks hold more treasuries. Why
do we still seem to have these V events
happening?
I guess my we should have them
sometimes. So, the idea that treasury
markets never had events. I mean, go
back to the 90s and there were massive V
events in like 2003. there's a massive
mortgage extension. There was a surprise
75 basis point hike in the night. So,
there's always been these events. I
think the the difference now is it's
harder to pinpoint a fundamental source.
Like usually back then you could say,
"Oh, this was the GSC's this was the Fed
hiking rates in a way that people didn't
expect. Now there's like this whole like
process of trying to figure out why this
is happening and and it it tends to um
happen very quickly and it tends to
disrupt a lot of relationships." But
like I I think in one sense this is
stuff that's been happening in the past.
It's just the market is much larger. The
banking system's ability to provide that
offset is is is lesser. Um and uh the
the the the frequency with which trades
happen just really gone up. I mean like
the markets are very active now. But I
think that's all kind of a symptom of
the issue which is it's kind of like a
just in time supply version of treasury
markets which is you have dealers can't
hold a lot of inventory. So they have to
match trades really efficiently. It used
to be if you didn't know the buyer and
the seller, you just hold it overnight.
Now the high frequency traders do that
for them in a very efficient fast-paced
way. And then the dealers are trying to
get hedge funds and through the price
mechanism to hold inventory on their
behalf because basis trades are
basically what dealers used to do. And
that's all very fragile. And so that
combination of things generates these
shocks because the whole that
arrangement can collapse very quickly.
But you know at the end of the day like
the the size of the market is growing
faster. Yeah. than the dealers have
capacity to to use. Nelly. Yeah. I just
to provide like a policy makers
perspective like if you just step back
there's just been so many changes in
technology and then the changes in the
buyer base. We talked about the
structural change on who buys now versus
then. So like in 2014 there was
something called a flash rally in the
trade. I remember that. Remember and
like no one understood why the Treasury
yield went up and down like 30 basis
points in 2 minutes and reversed and it
was it kind of scared the public sector,
you know, the government officials like
how is this possible? What is the trade
and had to do a lot with these new
highfrequency traders? It took a lot of
time to like dissect what happened. So
that was even before there was a lot of
treasury debt. Now we have more treasury
debt and there's just you know the
volume. But I guess I would also
separate the I would make a distinction
between volatility events and then
market illiquidity events just because
if the mark if news is volatile, there's
new changes in the economy, you would
expect
Treasury yields and prices to be
volatile. They should. They're supposed
to reflect that. And I think a lot of
what's been happening recently. But the
concerns are when you can't transact
easily and quickly because you've pulled
in more dealers pulled in more than they
might normally would just because of the
higher volatility. So you you should
always get a little well you should
always get a little less liquidity when
things get volatile you know just
because risk is higher but it's when
they sort of stop making markets or stop
posting or something then and you can't
actually transact those are the things
that the policy makers really care about
it it there's there's this balancing
thing where we want treasure marks to be
deep and liquid. Deep liquid means it's
inexpensive to transact which means the
dealers don't make much money per trade.
So the old joke like we're making losses
but we'll make up for it in volume kind
of thing and like hopefully not that but
the the uh the respon if you want low
transaction costs the the way you get
that and still have functioning
businesses leverage and this this has
been the case for you know 75 years
since the Treasury Fed that this was
always the core issue and so when you
leverage constrain banks and even if the
bank isn't leverage constrained when the
desk is leverage constrained when
leverage is a zero sum game within the
institution which is kind of what these
leverage ratios do everyone's fighting
over the same resource and that process
introduces friction and at the end of
the day I think these V events are
mostly just time slippage like if you
have to think about things for too long
the market can run away from you so you
know in 2020 if you had to spend two
days figuring out who gets incremental
balance sheet a lot can happen in two
days in March of 2020 and and and these
very human experiences are kind of what
drive uh the thing and we talked about
this on on the show that we did back in
uh in late April about the April event
and that time slippage is exactly a big
thing part of what happened when when
right before you fell asleep
on on April 9th, right? Um it's because
like look, you you can't call the New
York dealer desk to get more dealer
balance sheet at 11:30 at night New York
time um when you're trading in Hong
Kong, right? It's it's just hard to do
that. So So you get these VA events that
that are create illquid markets but only
at certain points in time, right? Right.
And and then that always gets arbed
away. You know, people are are, you
know, at the end of the day, we're we're
definitely not price takers, right?
There's a lot of people who are um you
know, basically want the price of their
of the asset to reflect the risk that
they're taking. And so, you're going to
get these instantaneous shifts in
expectations. When you get a news event,
when you get a headline from, you know,
Donald Trump and you think that maybe
the dollar is not going to be the
reserve currency anymore, that's going
to affect dollar assets regardless of
where they are in the world.
[Music]
This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway. And I'm
Jill Weisenthal. You can follow me at
the stalwart. Follow our producers,
Carmen Rodriguez, at Carmen Arman, dash
Bennett at D-Bot, and Kellbrooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots,
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we do these live recordings, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. Thanks
for listening.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.